
--- Page 1 ---
ARTICLE OPEN
A strategy to apply machine learning to small datasets in
materials science
Ying Zhang1and Chen Ling1
There is growing interest in applying machine learning techniques in the research of materials science. However, although it is
recognized that materials datasets are typically smaller and sometimes more diverse compared to other ﬁelds, the in ﬂuence of
availability of materials data on training machine learning models has not yet been studied, which prevents the possibility toestablish accurate predictive rules using small materials datasets. Here we analyzed the fundamental interplay between the
availability of materials data and the predictive capability of machine learning models. Instead of affecting the model precision
directly, the effect of data size is mediated by the degree of freedom (DoF) of model, resulting in the phenomenon of associationbetween precision and DoF. The appearance of precision –DoF association signals the issue of under ﬁtting and is characterized by
large bias of prediction, which consequently restricts the accurate prediction in unknown domains. We proposed to incorporate the
crude estimation of property in the feature space to establish ML models using small sized materials data, which increases theaccuracy of prediction without the cost of higher DoF. In three case studies of predicting the band gap of binary semiconductors,lattice thermal conductivity, and elastic properties of zeolites, the integration of crude estimation effectively boosted the predictive
capability of machine learning models to state-of-art levels, demonstrating the generality of the proposed strategy to construct
accurate machine learning models using small materials dataset.
npj Computational Materials  (2018) 4:25 ; doi:10.1038/s41524-018-0081-z
INTRODUCTION
In the past few decades the substantial advancement of machine
learning (ML) has spanned the application of this data drivenapproach throughout science, commerce, and industry.
1Recently,
there has been an increasing interest in applying ML to solve
problems in materials science.2–7In particular, ML techniques have
been used to represent inorganic materials,8–10predict funda-
mental properties,11–13create atomic potential,14–16identify
functional candidates,17–21analyze complex reaction networks,22
and guide experimental design.23–27The key ingredient behind
these successes is that the behavior in unknown domains can beaccurately estimated by quantitatively learning the pattern fromsufﬁcient training examples. However, compared to others ﬁelds
the materials data are typically much smaller and sometimes more
diverse,
12which undoubtable affects the construction of ML
models. For example, Faber et al.28found the predictive accuracy
of the ML model for the formation energy of Elpasolitecompounds showed a systematic improvement with increasingtraining set size. Schmidt et al.
29reported that the predicting error
for the formation energy of perovskite compounds decreasedmonotonically with the size of training set following a power law,
where doubling the training set decreased the error by around
20%. Lee et al. examined the ML models for band gaps ofinorganic compounds and found the predicting accuracy con-verged for the ordinary least-square regression and LASSO modelsat certain sizes of training set, while for the support vectormachine model the error still slowly decreased at the largestdataset in their study. While these studied unambiguouslydemonstrated that the less availability of training data not onlyrenders the detection of patterns more dif ﬁcult but also
deteriorates the capability of making prediction in the unexplored
domain, the role of materials dataset in constructing ML model
has not been systematically investigated to the best of ourknowledge. As a result, the possibility to establish accuratepredictive rules using small available materials datasets remains
unclear.
It is the focus of current work to comprehensively analyze the
interplay between the availability of materials data and the
predictive capability of ML models. Our study revealed animportant phenomenon when the model is trained using limited
available materials data: the association between the degree of
freedom (DoF) of model and the precision of prediction, that is,the increase of precision is at the cost of higher DoF. Originatedfrom the statistical bias-variance tradeoff, the appearance of
precision –DoF association restricts the accuracy of prediction in
unknown domains. We also propose a solution to improve theaccuracy without causing higher DoF by incorporating the crudeestimation of property (CEP) in the feature space. In three case
studies, the integration of crude estimation effectively improved
the predictive accuracy of ML models, demonstrating thegenerality of the proposed strategy to construct accurate MLmodels using small materials data.
RESULTS
Precision –DoF association
We started with a survey of reported ML models of materials
properties,
12,13,18,28–33focusing on the accuracy of prediction in
Received: 19 December 2017 Revised: 10 April 2018 Accepted: 16 April 2018
1Toyota Research Institute of North America, 1555 Woodridge Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA
Correspondence: Chen Ling (chen.ling@toyota.com)www.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
--- Page 2 ---
unknown domains. Such a property is usually quanti ﬁed by
evaluating the predicting error by means of cross-validation (CV).To compare models trained to predict different materials proper-ties, the CV errors were scaled by the spanning range of modeledproperties. As seen in Fig. 1, the scaled error was in the range of
1–2% for models trained with 10
3–104samples and increased to
10% and above for models established with ~100 –200 examples,
in full agreement with the intuition that the predictive accuracyincreases with the availability of materials data. The seemlyuniversality of the trend in Fig. 1is, however, surprising,
considering the diversity in the surveyed properties as well asthe variety of ML techniques used to construct the models. Fittingthe surveyed results led to the empirical power law of scaled error=0.67 × size
−0.372, agreed well with the decreasing of error to
predict the formation energy of perovskite with the training size ata power of −0.297.
29We acknowledge that the survey was
conducted for a few recent studies and the observed universality
is certainly subject to more examinations. Nonetheless, thechallenge to improve the predicting capability with limited
availability of materials data is clearly highlighted.
A detailed study was then performed to model the band gaps
of binary semiconductors ( Eg) as the representative example to
understand the effect of data size on the predictive precision. Weused a series of manually crafted chemical parameters as possibledescriptors, adapting the approach proposed by Ward et al.
34The
optimum set of features that best describes the patterns in the
training data was selected using the stepwise forward search. We
used the kernel ridge regression (KRR) to construct ML modelsbecause it gave the lowest predicting error as benchmarked withother ML algorithms (Supporting Information, Table S1). Tomanipulate the size of training data, subsets were randomly
sampled from the full dataset. Figure 2a shows the average ﬁve-
fold CV root mean-squared error (RMSE) of KRR models (unlessotherwise mentioned, all the errors in the paper were evaluatedusing the CV method). As expected, the CV-RMSE continuouslydecreased with the expansion of dataset. Fitting the RMSE with
data size gave a power law similar to that in Fig. 1. The smallest
CV-RMSE was recorded at 0.51 eV when the full dataset (108examples) was utilized. Although the prediction had a decentPearson correlation of 0.94 with the training property, therelatively large error indicated even the “best”model cannot
accurately predict E
g. The scaled error of 9.3% agreed well with the
trend shown in Fig. 1, further indicating the model did not achieve
any predictive capability beyond the observation in the survey.
To understand the origin of the large RMSE, we used the
Bootstrap method to break down the contribution of bias and
variance to the predicting error,35,36
bias2¼1
ntestXntest
l¼1fxlðÞ /C0 yl/C0/C1 2; (1)
variance ¼1
ntestXntest
l¼11
BXB
b¼1fxl;Db/C0/C1
/C0fxlðÞ/C0/C1 2; (2)
where ntestis the number of testing data, Bis the number of
training sets sampled from the original training data, ylis the value
of the target property, and f(xl;Db) is the property predicted by the
model using the training set of Db.fxlðÞ is the average of
predicted property for example l.
The squared bias was estimated at 0.26 eV2, over four time to
the variance of 0.06 eV2. A large bias overwhelming small variance
suggested that the selected features were not expressive enoughto predict the property, or in other words signaled the statisticalissue of under ﬁtting. For the model falling in the region of
under ﬁtting, the inclusion of more features can effectively
mitigate the statistical error. Figure 2b shows the RMSE as a
function of the degree of freedom (DoF) of models, de ﬁned as the
Fig. 1 Survey of scaled error and the size of training set in recent
publications. The red dashed line shows the ﬁtted curve of scaled
error=0.67 × size−0.372
Fig. 2 Effect of data size ( n) on the root mean squared error of KRR models for predicting experimental band gaps. aAveraged ﬁve-fold cross-
validation RMSE as a function of data size. The red line shows the ﬁtting curve of RMSE =1.42 × size−0.23.bAveraged RMSE versus the
averaged degree of freedom of KRR modelsA strategy to apply machine learning to small materials
Y Zhang and C Ling
2
npj Computational Materials (2018)  25 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences1234567890():,;
--- Page 3 ---
number of parameters with non-zero regression coef ﬁcients.37
Clearly, both the model precision and DoF exhibited high
correlation with training data and the improvement of precision
was strongly associated with higher model DoF.
To unveil the underlying relationship between data size, DoF,
and precision, a mediation analysis was conducted as illustrated in
Fig. 3. In the mediation analysis, three variables are chosen as
predictor, outcome and mediator and their relations are explored
through statistical signi ﬁcant test.38In our study, the predictor
variable was data size, the outcome variable was RMSE (precision)and the mediator variable was DoF. All binary associations of
RMSE with data size, RMSE with DoF, data size, and DoF were
statistically signi ﬁcant ( p«0.01, t-test). Entering DoF in the
regression greatly reduced the strength of the correlation
between RMSE and data size and the p-value in t-test was
increased by more than 10 orders of magnitude, con ﬁrming that
the in ﬂuence of data size on predictive precision was mediated by
model complexity. Therefore, instead of affecting the precisiondirectly, the variation of data size altered the DoF of optimized
model, which then changed the accuracy of prediction. Naturally,
this mediation effect resulted in the association between DoF and
predictive precision as observed in Fig. 2b.
To examine whether the choice of ML method affects the
conclusion that the effect of data size on the model precision is
mediated by the DoF, we also analyzed the models establishedwith the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO)
regression. The CV-RMSE to predict E
gusing LASSO method was
0.71 eV. The less accuracy was probably attributed to the failure to
capture the complicated physics with a linear regression
algorithm. Figure 4a shows the selection of LASSO model using
varied training sets. The decreasing of RMSE was associated with
smaller tuning parameter of LASSO model, λ. In LASSO method,
the tuning parameter determines the shrinkage of regressioncoefﬁcient. A smaller λapplies less penalty for shrinkage, hence
permitting the inclusion of more features in the optimized model.
As shown in Supporting Information, Figure S1, the associationbetween RMSE and DoF was clearly evidenced. Through the
mediation analysis we con ﬁrmed that the in ﬂuence of data size on
predictive precision was mediated by the DoF of LASSO models
(Supporting Information, Figure S2). These results demonstrated
the precision –DoF association as a general statistical phenomenon
when the model is trained with small sized materials data rather
than a unique observation dependent on the choice of regression
method.
These results reveal the in ﬂuence of materials dataset on
establishing ML model as following. Ideally, an ML model should
be established to exhibit hidden relations between the property
and features determined by the underlying physics. However, inpractice, the ML model is constructed to best describe the
structure in training data. Any change of internal pattern intraining set will lead to the change of ML model. Especially, formodels trained with small materials dataset, the DoF to selectfeatures is sensitive to the availability of training data. While
inadequate selection of expressive features causes the under-
ﬁtting of property, adding more training data allows the inclusion
of more features to alleviate the issue of under ﬁtting. Conse-
quently, the predictive precision is improved with the cost ofhigher model complexity, resulting in the observed precision –DoF
association.
Although it originates from the fundamental statistics, the
precision –DoF association is more than just a statistical phenom-
enon. Because the association occurs as a result of the under-ﬁtting, the predicting error is largely dominated by
characteristically large bias, which prevents to establish accurate
predictive rules. In the above study, even the “best”model
showed worse performance than modern density functionaltheory prediction of E
g. Therefore, the development of effective
strategy to improve model precision without the cost of higher DoFbecomes a crucial challenge to practice ML in modeling materials
properties.
Strategy
In principle, the improvement of precision can be approached by
appropriately manipulating the training data. For example, we cannaturally consider adding more examples to the training set.However, simply expanding the dataset not only leads to highlycomplex model dif ﬁcult to interpret the embedded physics but
also is likely hindered by the expensive cost to conduct additional
experiments. Using the empirical relation established from Fig. 1,
doubling the data size roughly leads to the decrease of error by23%. Hence the exponentially growing cost challenges thefeasibility to improve the accuracy by adding new materials data.A model can be also constructed by restricting the con ﬁgurational
space of materials, such as predicting the band gaps of selected
families of semiconductors with ﬁxed composition or crystalline
structure instead of modeling compounds spanning a wide
Fig. 3 Mediation analysis on the relationship of data size and
precision (RMSE) mediated by model DoF. The top numbers are thestandardized regression coef ﬁcients and standard errors in the
bracket. The bottom numbers show the p-value in t-test
Fig. 4 Effect of data size ( n) on the averaged cross-validation RMSE
of LASSO models for predicting experimental band gaps. Theorange circles is the position of the optimized modelsA strategy to apply machine learning to small materials
Y Zhang and C Ling
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2018)  25 
--- Page 4 ---
chemical space.25,39As a result, the constructed ML-estimator
gained more precision, but sacri ﬁced the generality when
applying outside of the con ﬁned domain.
Considering the less ﬂexibility of training data, a strategy should
be developed from designing appropriate feature space for the
modeling, which is widely recognized as a critical step in materials
informatics.30,34,40Following the analysis in the previous section,
let us imagine a simple toy model where the property is explicitlydetermined by a single feature. In this case, the precision –DoF
association should disappear once this special feature is included
in the modeling, even if the training data only contain, for
example, two samples. Therefore, our intention is to design
features to meet the consideration of (1) providing expressive
information so that the property can be estimated (though the
estimation may not be accurate) and (2) satisfying otherrequirements such as low dimensionality and cheap cost of
acquiring.
30Based on the consideration 1, we remind ourselves
that the prediction of materials property has been carried out
centuries before the era of ML. Although the empirical estimation
may not be suf ﬁciently accurate in terms of predicting absolute
values, it may still provide at least qualitatively knowledge about
targeted property. Because any prior knowledge of the targeted
property should be considered when constructing the appropriate
feature space, we are therefore motived to exercise the idea ofusing the CEP as a descriptor additional to the chemical
descriptors in the ML models.
To give a more precise description of the proposed strategy, we
deﬁne the CEP as the prediction of targeted property using
methods at less accurate level, which includes zero or near zero
computational demanding calculations, empirical models, andnon-expensive experimental measurements. With this de ﬁnition,
the usage of CEP meets the consideration 2 for the cheap cost of
acquiring. Our idea is to incorporate the CEP together with the
previously used chemical descriptors to predict targeted property.
In previous reports, the PBE-calculated band gaps, which is not
accurate but also less computational demanding, were used to
predict the band gaps calculated at more accurate and muchmore expensive level.
41,42While the success of the earlier work
may partially be related to the fact that both the descriptor and
property were obtained using similar theory of foundation, we
prove in current work that the usage of CEP as a descriptor
improves the prediction of experimentally measured properties,
where the model performance is strongly affected by the large
noise contained in the training set. Furthermore, our study
demonstrates that the means to obtain CEP is not restricted to
density functional calculations, but can be extended to other non-expensive methods. In the following section, we constructed ML
models in three exercises: the prediction of Egusing GGA-
calculated values as the CEP, lattice thermal conductivity ( κL) using
empirical models to obtain the CEP, and elastic properties of
zeolites using force ﬁeld calculations to obtain the CEP. In all three
studies the ML models achieved state-of-art predictive capabilityafter integrating CEP in the feature space, demonstrating the
generality of prosed strategy to construct accurate ML models
with small available materials data.
Exercise 1: Band gap of binary semiconductors
Weﬁrst examined the proposed method in the modeling of E
g.
The band gaps simulated at the GGA-level were used as the crude
estimation of Eg, the values of which were taken from Materials
Project.43The performance of the new KRR model is evaluated in
Fig. 5a using the leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV). In the
LOOCV, the prediction of the property at one position is
performed by removing that speci ﬁc observation and using the
rest as the training set. The relationship between ML-predicted
value and Egis clearly linear without large deviations even in the
range of extremely low or high values. The CV-RMSE of the new
ML model was 0.34 eV, decreased by 33% of the model using only
chemical descriptors (0.51 eV). The scaled error was reduced to
6.2% after incorporating the GGA band gap in the feature space.
The construction of ML models to predict the band gap of
semiconductors was attempted in several reports. Of particular
relevance to current work, Lee et al.41used the PBE-band gap of
inorganic compounds to predict the values from G 0W0calculation
and achieved the CV error of 0.18 eV. Pilania et al.42predicted the
band gap of elpasolite (A 2BB ′X6-type) compounds calculated at
HSE06 level using a multi- ﬁdelity co-kriging statistical learning
framework and reported the accuracy of 0.1 –0.2 eV on the
validation set. At the ﬁrst glance the error of current ML model
seemed to be higher than these two reports. The larger predicting
error of the current model can be attributed to two aspects. The
ﬁrst one is the different con ﬁguration spaces in the ML models. In
the work of Pilania et al.,42the composition and crystalline
structure was ﬁxed to A 2BB ′X6and elpasolite, respectively, leaving
the only variant to be chemical constitutes. In general, the higher
DoF in the con ﬁguration space, the more challenging to construct
an accurate ML model. Another source of error came from the
noise of measurement in the training data. While both Lee et al.
and Pilania et al. employed values from ﬁrst-principles calculations
as training data with the noise of calculation determined by the
accuracy of density functional theories, the current work modeled
the experimental Egmeasured by various techniques, in which the
Fig. 5 KRR model to predict Egusing GGA calculated crude estimaiton. aComparison of KRR models using GGA band gap and not using GGA
band gap as a descriptor. The GGA-simulated values are also plotted for comparison. bEffect of using crude estimation having different
correlation with the experimental measurements. The red circles show the positions of the model using and not using the GGA band gap as a
descriptorA strategy to apply machine learning to small materials
Y Zhang and C Ling
4
npj Computational Materials (2018)  25 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
--- Page 5 ---
uncertainty of measurement was expected to have larger
contribution to the predictive error. We continue to discuss thecontribution of experimental noise to predicting error in the next
case study. To benchmark the performance of ML model, the
predicted band gap was compared with that from GW calculationfor 49 compounds.
44While both GW simulation and ML exhibited
reasonable predictive accuracy, the ML model showed smallerRMSE of 0.39 eV than that of GW simulation (0.52 eV; Supportinginformation, Figure S4), quantitatively demonstrating the pre-
dictive capability of the ML model.
Having established the predictive precision of the ML model, we
now discuss the mechanism of the apparent improved perfor-
mance after integrating GGA band gap in the feature space.
Because of the well-known underestimation of band gap in GGAcalculation, the improvement of ML-prediction cannot beattributed to the argument that GGA band gap is suf ﬁciently
accurate to predict the experimental values. In fact, the linearregression with only the feature of GGA band gap gave a CV-RMSE
of 0.71 eV. Statistically, GGA band gap has a Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient of 0.86 with E
g. Therefore, although GGA simulation
falls away from accurately predicting the experimental value, thevalue of GGA band gap provides a conditional range to estimateE
g.45Adding this expressive information reduced the squared bias
from 0.26 to 0.09 eV2(Bootstrap estimation), demonstrating the
signi ﬁcant alleviation of the issue of under ﬁtting. More impor-
tantly, despite the greatly improved precision, the model DoF wasin fact reduced from 12 to 9 after adding GGA band gap as a newdescriptor, con ﬁrming that the improvement of precision was no
longer associated with the increase of DoF. These results were in
full agreement with the expectation that the usage of CEP
descriptor enhances the accuracy of prediction without scarifyingthe complexity of ML models.
To further analyze the effect of integrating the statistically
correlated CEP in the feature space, we added synthetic Gaussiannoise to the GGA band gap, which acted as an irreducible error ina presumably badly controlled estimation. As we expect,integrating a feature weakly correlated with the target propertybarely affected the predictive performance, as shown in Fig. 5b. At
the limit when the CEP was composed of random noise, the model
behaved the same as that without knowing the crude estimation.The predicting error decreased rapidly once the Pearson correla-tion exceeded a threshold, about 0.5 in our study. Interestingly,this threshold was coincidently close to the highest Pearsoncorrelation between E
gand chemical descriptors. We note that
this result did not prove that an ML model should always select
features exhibiting higher correlation with the property. None-theless, it clearly demonstrated that the integration of CEPimproves the predicting capability if the estimation showssufﬁcient statistical correlation with property.
Exercise 2: Lattice thermal conductivity
In contrast to the study of E
g, the CEP of the lattice thermal
conductivity ( κL) cannot be directly obtained as output from ab
initio calculation. Although ﬁrst-principle-based methods can
predict κLthrough accurately accounting for the anharmonic
lattice dynamics, the high computational cost prevents the usageas descriptors in ML modeling. In our study, we used the empiricalSlack model to obtain the CEP of κ
L,46assuming that the phonon
scattering is dominated by the Umklapp process. In addition, we
used a uni ﬁed Grüneissen parameter for all compounds to avoid
the expensive calculation of the anharmonicity of lattice dynamics.While these assumptions together with other sources of error suchas ignoring the contribution from optical phonon evidentlyresulted in apparent inaccuracy to predict κ
L(Supporting
Information, Figure S5), the estimation showed good statistical
trend with the experimental values with the Pearson correlation of0.87 and the Spearman ranking correlation of 0.85, suggesting thesimpli ﬁed Slack model was an inaccurate estimation but
statistically correlated descriptor to establish the ML model.
Figure 6compares the experimental κ
Lwith the prediction from
ML model using the LOOCV method. Clearly, the ML model
accurately predicted κLacross a diverse range of compounds. The
difference between the experimental κLand predicted value lied
within a factor of 1.5 for 65% of the whole 93 compounds and
within a factor of 2 for 90% of compounds. Only one outlier (GaTe)
had the predicted value differing from experiment by more thanhalf an order of magnitude. Quantitatively, we used the averagefactor difference (AFD) as proposed by Miller et al.
47to evaluate
the performance of the ML model. For the LOOCV prediction, the
model has AFD of 1.38 (1.34 if not including GaTe in themodeling), exceeding the reported value of 1.48 using a modi ﬁed
Debye –Callaway model to predict κ
L.47The performance of the ML
model was further veri ﬁed by comparing the prediction with other
reported models. For the compounds with simple crystallinestructures of rocksalt, zincblende, and diamond, the current ML
model achieved the AFD of 1.27 while for compounds with more
complicated crystalline structures the AFD was 1.42. These valuesdemonstrated the signi ﬁcant improvement of ML model com-
pared to the calculation using Slack model with full Grüneissen
parameter calculations or with the Grüneissen parameter esti-
mated from the Mie –Grüneissen equation.
48,49
It is interesting to note that the prediction for high κLseemed to
exhibit higher accuracy than that for lower κL. The examination of
AFD con ﬁrmed this observation by showing an uneven distribu-
tion of error: for compounds with κLhigher than 0.1 W cm−1K−1,
the AFD was 1.33 while for those with κLlower than 0.1 W cm−1
K−1the AFD was 1.43. These results re ﬂected the effect of the
uncertainty of measurement on the predictive accuracy. Inprinciple, a random noise affects the predicting error indepen-dently with the range of property. However, for models that
learned the property in the logarithm format the predicting error
is calculated on the relative scale, magnifying the noise forsamples with small valued properties. Similar observations werenoticed in the ML modeling of elastic properties of inorganic
compounds, where the prediction seemed to be better for higher
moduli materials.
39
Fig. 6 Comparison of the lattice thermal conductivity from
experimental measurement and from kernel ridge regression usingleave-one-out calculation. The dark and light yellow shows thedeviation within a factor of 2 and 5, respectivelyA strategy to apply machine learning to small materials
Y Zhang and C Ling
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2018)  25 
--- Page 6 ---
Exercise 3: Elastic modulus of zeolites
The above two cases used the experimental values of EgandκLas
the training property and the precision of ML model wasconsequently affected by the uncertainty associated with differentmeasurement techniques. In many studies the training set of
property is created through high-throughput simulation where
the uncertainty of measurements is better controlled. To examinethe performance of the proposed strategy in the prediction ofsimulation derived properties, we modeled the Voigt –Reuss –Hill
averaged bulk and shear moduli ( Kand G, respectively) of zeolites.
Evans and Coudert
31recently calculated Kand Gfor over one
hundred silica zeolites by means of the DFT method and used
gradient boosting regressor to predict the DFT calculated values.Their ML model achieved signi ﬁcantly better predictive accuracy
when compared to force ﬁelds for prediction of bulk modulus. For
ﬁve classical force ﬁelds, the prediction of bulk modulus showed
large deviation from DFT values with systematic errors exhibited in
some calculations. Here we used the dataset of Evans and Coudert
and established new ML models by incorporating the force ﬁeld
calculation as an additional descriptor in the feature space. Figure6compared the three-fold CV RMSE of different ML models for the
prediction of log( K). In general, the integration of CEP from force
ﬁeld calculation improved the precision with RMSE reduced by
around 50%. Similarly improved predictive precision was alsoobserved for the prediction of log( G) (Supporting Information,
Figure S6). Interestingly, although the Catlow potential gave betterprediction of DFT-calculated bulk modulus compared to otherclassical potentials,
31the corresponding ML models had the
second worst predictive accuracy. As shown in the insertion of Fig.
7, the RMSE was strongly correlated to the relative in ﬂuence of
CEPs in the ML model. Therefore, the improved predictiveprecision was attributed to the statistical relation of CEP withthe property but not to its absolute value.
DISCUSSION
We summarized the results from the cases studies in Table 1. All
these studies utilized the available dataset of around 100examples, which in our opinion represented a lower limit to
apply ML in materials research. Although these studies varied in
terms of data source, method to obtain CEP, the algorithm toselect appropriate features, and regression method, in the vicinityof including CEP as a descriptor the predictive capability was
effectively boosted with scaled error well below the trend
observed in the aforementioned survey, demonstrating thecapability of the proposed strategy in constructing accurate MLmodels with small available materials data. Of importance is that
the success of proposed strategy relies on the statistical relation of
CEP and property instead of requiring suf ﬁciently accurate
estimation of targeted property itself, which places the minimalhurdle to design appropriate descriptor. Considering the vast
number of models and methods to empirically predict materials
properties, we are optimistic that our proposed strategy permits ageneral solution to bridge machine learning techniques and theconventional wisdom of materials scientists to create better
predictive models.
Developing the method to harvest the trend in a small materials
data is not only of scienti ﬁc signi ﬁcance but also of practical
importance. Many materials properties are available in the
quantity typically of the size of one to a few hundreds,necessitating the needs of special care when attempting toestablish ML model. The current work studied the fundamental
interplay between the data volume and predictive precision. We
demonstrated that instead of affecting the precision directly theeffect of data volume is mediated by the model DoF, resulting inthe precision –DoF association when the model is trained with
limited availability of materials data. The appearance of
precision –DoF association is a signal of statistical under ﬁtting
and characterized by large bias of prediction, hence restricting the
predictive capability in unknown domains. A solution to establish
accurate ML models with small materials data is proposed byincorporating the CEP as a descriptor. In three case studies, theusage of crude estimation effectively boosted the predictive
capability of ML models to state-of-art levels, demonstrating the
generality of the proposed strategy to construct accurate MLmodels using small materials data.
METHODS
Data preparation
Property dataset . Except for indium nitride, the band gaps of AxBybinary
compounds with experimental values in the range of 0.5 –6 eV were
compiled from two handbooks.50,51For indium nitride we used the value
of 0.77 eV from the latest measurement by Wu et al.52Interestingly, the
Fig. 7 Root mean square error of gradient boosting regressor to
predict the bulk modulus (log( K)) of silica zeolite using crude
estimation from different classical force ﬁeld calculations. The RMSE
of the model not using crude estimation is also shown. Insertion: therelative in ﬂuence of different classical force ﬁeld calculations in the
machine learning modelTable 1. Summary of the results from case studies of modeling the
experimental band gap ( Eg), lattice thermal conductivity( κL), and
elastics of zeolite (log( K))
Property Eg κL log(K)
Data volume 108 93 102
Scaled error (%) 6.2 4.1 6.1
Scaled error
before (%)9.3 6.2 13
DoF 9 5 -a
DoF before 12 7 -a
Source of
propertyExperiment Experiment DFT
Source of CEP DFT Empirical model Force ﬁeld
calculation
Regression
methodKernel ridge Kernel ridge Gradient
boosting
Feature
selectionStepwise
forward searchStepwise
forward search—a
aFollowing the same approach used in ref.31no feature selection was
performed for log( K)A strategy to apply machine learning to small materials
Y Zhang and C Ling
6
npj Computational Materials (2018)  25 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
--- Page 7 ---
model trained with the handbook value of 1.9 eV always predicted the
band gap of indium nitride around 0.8 eV. The lattice thermal conductivitydata were compiled from several resources.47,49,51,53–57The dataset was
cleaned in the following procedure. For the materials studied in ref.47, the
same values of thermal conductivity were used. For other materials with
duplicate measurements of the thermal conductivity, we used the valuesfrom the latest reports.
Crude estimation of properties . The modeling of E
gused the band gap
calculated at the GGA level from Materials Project as the crude estimation.Note the dataset did not include compounds with transition metals.Therefore, we did not distinguish the GGA and GGA +U calculations in the
modeling. The GGA band gap is well-known to underestimate the
experimental band gap signi ﬁcantly. On average, the GGA band gap
deviated from experimental values by 1.39 eV for the complied dataset.
The CEP of κ
Lwas obtained using the Slack model
κL¼0:849´3ﬃﬃﬃ
43p
20π3ð1/C00:514ϒ/C01þ0:228γ/C02Þ´k3
bθ3
DρV1=3
h3TN3=2nγ2; (3)
where the Debye temperature was calculated
θD¼h
kbð6π2nÞ1
3fðσÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K=ρp
: (4)
Here γis the Grüneissen parameter, Tis the temperature, Nis the number
of atoms in the unit cell, Vis the unit cell volume, ρis the density, kbis the
Boltzmann constant, σis the Poisson ratio, and Kis the bulk modulus. The
inputs of V,ρ,σ, and Kwere all obtained from ﬁrst-principles calculations in
Materials Project.39To avoid the expensive calculation of γ, we assume a
value of 1 for all compounds. This simpli ﬁcation was made on the
following considerations. First, the Grüneissen parameter can be roughlyestimated as 0.5( ∂K/∂P)−1, where the value of the derivative for most
materials is around 3 –6.58Second, the value of 1 lies between that for
tetrahedral compounds and for octahedral compounds,47which are two of
the most common bonding environments in inorganic compounds. Third,we anticipated that the error caused by this simpli ﬁcation as other sources
of error will be corrected in the ML modeling.
Chemical descriptors . Following the approach of Ward et al.,34the
“ﬁngerprint ”-type chemical descriptors were categorized into the follow-
ing: (1) stoichiometric attributes including the weight percentage and
atomic percentage of the elements; (2) elemental properties including
electronegativity, atomic radius, effective nuclear charge, Vander Waalsradius, covalent radius, row number in the periodic table, block number,enthalpy of formation of gaseous atoms, ionization energy, and valencenumber; (3) compound descriptors including the molecular weight,density, volume, coordination number, and atomic number density; and(4) electronic structure contributes. The subset of optimal features was
selected using the feature selection algorithm.
Machine learning
Regression . For the KRR the Scikit-learn package in Python was used.59
The prediction value for the property is
^fKRRxðÞ ¼Xn
i¼1αiKx;xiðÞ ; (5)
where Kis a kernel to measure the similarity between the training point xi
and the predicting point x. A standard choice of the kernel is the radial
basis function kernel Kðx;xiÞ¼exp/C0x/C0xijj2
2σ2/C16/C17
with the length scale σused
to tune the similarity. The weights α=(α1,α2,…αn)┬are a set of variables
that minimize the cost function
Cα1;¼αn ðÞ ¼1
2Xn
i¼1yi/C0^fKRRxiðÞ/C16/C172
þηX
ijαiKðxi;xjÞαj; (6)
where ηis a tuning parameter to control the regularization term with the
squared error. The hyperparameters σand ηare determined from CV.
For the LASSO method the glmnet package in R was used.60The LASSO
prediction value for the target property at the point xis
^fLASSO xðÞ ¼ β0þXp
jβjxj; (7)
where xjis the jth feature of the predicting point x. The coef ﬁcients βjin
LASSO model are a set of variables to minimize the objective function
Lβ0;β1;¼;βp/C0/C1
¼Xn
i¼1yi/C0β0/C0Xp
j¼1βjxij/C16/C172
þλXp
j¼1βj/C12/C12/C12/C12; (8)where nis the number of data, xijis the jth feature of the ithdata xi,yiis the
target property of the ith data, and λis a tuning parameter to control the
impact of the shrinkage penalty, λPp
j¼1βj/C12/C12/C12/C12.
The prediction for Zeolite mechanic properties were utilizing the
gradient boosting regression method as employed in the study of Evans
and Coudert.31The calculation was performed using the gbm package in
R.61
Feature selection . In the LASSO regression, the model was determined by
varying the tuning parameter λso that the shrinkage selects a subset of
non-zero coef ﬁcients to minimize the CV error. In the KRR, the stepwise
forward search procedure was used to select the features. The stepwiseforward search started with zero feature and iteratively searched for the
next feature with the largest reduction of CV error. The search stopped
when the CV error cannot be reduced by adding new feature.
Mediation analysis . The mediation analysis was conducted following the
procedure of Preacher and Kelly,38computed with MBESS package in R
using an ordinary least squares regression-based analysis.62The standar-
dized regression coef ﬁcient along with the standard error of the
coefﬁcients are reported. To determine the signi ﬁcance of the relation,
thet-test was conducted at the statistical signi ﬁcance level of 0.01.
Data Availability
The datasets for the study are available from the corresponding author on
reasonable request.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors want to thank their colleague Dr. Debasish Banerjee, Dr. Ryoji Asahi from
Toyota Central R&D Labs, and Dr. Yoshiumi Kawamura from Toyota Motor
Corporation for their instructive suggestions, Dr. Shihong Zhu and Dr. HongshuChen for the discussion of statistical methods. We are especially grateful to Dr. Jack D.Evans for providing us the raw data of zeolite calculations.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C.L. conceived the idea and designed the project. Y.Z. performed the experiment and
prepared the data. Both authors analyzed the results, wrote, and revised the
manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the npj Computational
Materials website ( https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-018-0081-z ).
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
REFERENCES
1. Jordan, M. I.., & Mitchell, T. M.. Machine learning: trends, perspectives, and pro-
spects. Science 349, 255–260 (2015).
2. Agrawal, A. & Choudhary, A. Perspective: materials informatics and big data:
realization of the fourth paradigm of science in materials science. APL Mater. 4,
053208 (2016).
3. Lookman, T., Alexander, F. J. & Rajan, K. Information Science for Materials Dis-
covery and Design (Springer, Switzerland, 2016).
4. Hill, J. et al. Materials science with large-scale data and informatics: unlocking
new opportunities. MRS Bull. 41, 399–409 (2016).
5. Kalidindi, S. R. & Graef, M.D. Materials data science: current status and future
outlook. Ann. Rev. Mater. Res. 45, 171–193 (2015).
6. Rajan, K. Materials informatics: the materials “gene”and big data. Ann. Rev. Mater.
Res.45, 153–169 (2015).
7. Ramprasad, R., Batra, R., Pilania, G., Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, A. & Kim, C. Machine
learning in materials informatics: recent applications and prospects. npj Comput.
Mater. 3, 54 (2017).
8. Seko, A., Hayashi, H., Nakayama, K., Takahashi, A. & Tanaka, I. Representation of
compounds for machine-learning prediction of physical properties. Phys. Rev. B
95, 144110 (2017).A strategy to apply machine learning to small materials
Y Zhang and C Ling
7
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2018)  25 
--- Page 8 ---
9. Schütt, K. T. et al. How to represent crystal structures for machine learning:
towards fast prediction of electronic properties. Phys. Rev. B 89, 205118 (2014).
10. Isayev, O. et al. Materials cartography: representing and mining materials space
using structural and electronic ﬁngerprints. Chem. Mater. 27, 735–743 (2015).
11. Medasani, B. et al. Predicting defect behavior in B2 intermetallics by merging ab
initio modeling and machine learning. npj Comput. Mater. 2, 1 (2016).
12. Jong, M.D. et al. A statistical learning framework for materials science: application
to elastic moduli of k-nary inorganic polycrystalline compounds. Sci. Rep. 6, 34256
(2016).
13. Legrain, F., Carrete, J., Roekeghem, A. V., Curtarolo, S. & Mingo, N. How chemical
composition alone can predict vibrational free energies and entropies of solids.
Chem. Mater. 29, 6220 –6227 (2017).
14. Chi, C. et al. Accurate force ﬁeld for molybdenum by machine learning large
materials data. Phys. Rev. Mater 1, 043603 (2017).
15. Li, Z., Kermode, J. R. & Vita, A. D. Molecular dynamics with on-the- ﬂy machine
learning of quantum-mechanical forces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 096405 (2015).
16. Takahashi, A., Seko, A. & Tanaka, I. Conceptual and practical bases for the high
accuracy of machine learning interatomic potentials: application to elementaltitanium. Phys. Rev. Mater. 1, 063801 (2017).
17. Li, Z., Wang, S., Chin, W. S., Achenie, L. E. & Xin, H. High-throughput screening of
bimetallic catalysts enabled by machine learning. J. Mater. Chem. A 5,
24131 –24138 (2017).
18. Ma, X., Li, Z., Achenie, L. E. K. & Xin, H. Machine-learning-augmented chemi-
sorption model for CO2 electroreduction catalyst screening. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6,
3528–3533 (2015).
19. Oliynyk, A. O. et al. High-throughput machine-learning-driven synthesis of full-
Heusler compounds. Chem. Mater. 28, 7324 –7331 (2016).
20. Monnodi-Kanakkithodi, A., Huan, T. D. & Ramprasad, R. Mining materials design
rules from data: the example of polymer dielectrics. Chem. Mater. 29, 9901 –9010
(2017).
21. Sendek, A. D. et al. Holistic computational structure screening of more than
12,000 candidates for solid lithium-ion conductor materials. Energy Environ. Sci.
10, 306–320 (2017).
22. Ulissi, Z. W., Medford, A. J., Bligaard, T. & Nørskov, J. K. To address surface reaction
network complexity using scaling relations machine learning and DFT calcula-tions. Nat. Commun. 8, 14621 (2016).
23. Raccuglia, P. et al. Machine-learning-assisted materials discovery using failed
experiments. Nature 553,7 3–77 (2016).
24. Xue, D. et al. Accelerated search for materials with targeted properties by
adaptive design. Nat. Commun. 7, 11241 (2015).
25. Dey, R. et al. Informatics-aided bandgap engineering for solar materials. Comput.
Mater. Sci. 83, 185–195 (2014).
26. Kim, E., Huang, K., Jegelka, S. & Olivetti, E. Virtual screening of inorganic materials
synthesis parameters with deep learning. npj Comput. Mater. 3, 53 (2017).
27. Kim, E. et al. Machine-learned and codi ﬁed synthesis parameters of oxide
materials. Sci. Data 4, 170127 (2017).
28. Faber, F. A., Lindmaa, A., Lilienfeld, O. A. V. & Armiento, R. Machine learning
energies of 2 million Elpasolite (ABC2 D6) crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 135502
(2016).
29. Schmidt, J. et al. Predicting the thermodynamic stability of solids combining
density functional theory and machine learning. Chem. Mater. 29, 5090 –5103
(2017).
30. Ghiringhelli, L. M., Vybiral, J., Levchenko, S. V., Draxl, C. & Schef ﬂer, M. Big data of
materials science: critical role of the descriptor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 105503 (2015).
31. Evans, J. D. & Coudert, F.-X. Predicting the mechanical properties of zeolite fra-
meworks by machine learning. Chem. Mater. 29, 7833 –7839 (2017).
32. Wu, H. et al. Robust FCC solute diffusion predictions from ab-initio machine
learning methods. Comput. Mater. Sci. 134, 160–165 (2017).
33. Meredig, B. et al. Combinatorial screening for new materials in unconstrained
composition space with machine learning. Phys. Rev. B 89, 094104 (2014).
34. Ward, L., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A. & Wolverton, C. A general-purpose machine
learning framework for predicting properties of inorganic materials. npj Comput.
Mater. 2, 16028 (2016).
35. Efron, B. & Tibshirani, R. J. An Introduction to the Bootstrap (Chapman & Hall/CRC,
New York, 1993).
36. Geman, S., Bienenstock, E. & Doursat, R. Neural networks and the bias/variance
dilemma. Neural Comput. 4,1–58 (1992).
37. Zou, H., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. On the “degrees of freedom ”of the LASSO. Ann.
Stat. 5, 2173 –2192 (2007).
38. Preacher, K. J. & Kelley, K. Effect size measures for mediation models: quantitative
strategies for communicating indirect effects. Psychol. Methods 16,9 3–115 (2011).39. Pilania, G. et al. Machine learning bandgaps of double perovskites. Sci. Rep. 6,
19375 (2016).
40. Curtarolo, S. et al. The high-throughput highway to computational materials
design. Nat. Mater. 12, 191–201 (2013).
41. Lee, J., Seko, A., Shitara, K., Nakayama, K. & Tanaka, I. Prediction model of band
gap for inorganic compounds by combination of density functional theory cal-culations and machine learning techniques. Phys. Rev. B 93, 115104 (2016).
42. Pilania, G., Gubernatis, J. E. & Lookman, T. Multi- ﬁdelity machine learning models
for accurate bandgap predictions of solids. Comput. Mater. Sci. 129, 156 –163
(2017).
43. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: a materials genome approach to
accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013).
44. Lany, S. Band-structure calculations for the 3d transition metal oxides in GW.
Phys. Rev. B 87, 085112 (2013).
45. Setyawan, W., Gaume, R. M., Lam, S., Feigelson, R. S. & Curtarolo, S. High-
throughput combinatorial database of electronic band structures for inorganic
scintillator materials. ACS Comb. Sci. 13, 382–390 (2011).
46. Slack, G. A. The thermal conductivity of nonmetallic crystals. Solid State Phys. 34,
1–71 (1979).
47. Miller, S. A. et al. Capturing anharmonicity in a lattice thermal conductivity Model
for high-throughput predictions. Chem. Mater. 29, 2494 –2501 (2017).
48. Madsen, G. K., Katre, A. & Bera, C. Calculating the thermal conductivity of the
silicon clathrates using the quasi-harmonic approximation. Phys. Status Solidi A
213, 802–807 (2015).
49. Toher, C. et al. High-throughput computational screening of thermal con-
ductivity, Debye temperature, and Grüneisen parameter using a quasiharmonicDebye model. Phys. Rev. B 90, 174107 (2014).
50. Weber, M. J. Handbook of Optical Materials (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2002).
51. Madelung, O. Semiconductors: Data Handbook 3rd edn (Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg GmbH, New York, 2004).
52. Wu, J. et al. Unusual properties of the fundamental band gap of InN. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 80, 3967 (2002).
53. Yan, J. et al. Material descriptors for predicting thermoelectric performance.
Energy Environ. Sci. 8, 983–994 (2015).
54. Biswas, K., Zhao, L.-D. & Kanatzidis, M. G. Tellurium-free thermaoelectric: the
anisotropic n-type semiconductor Bi2S3. Adv. Energy Mater. 2, 634–638 (2012).
55. Plata, J. J. et al. An ef ﬁcient and accurate framework for calculating lattice thermal
conductivity of solids: AFLOW-AAPL automatic anharmonic phonon library. Npj
Comput. Mater. 3, 45 (2017).
56. Tan, Q. et al. Thermoelectrics with earth abundant elements: low thermal con-
ductivity and high thermopower in doped SnS. J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 17302 (2014).
57. Zhang, H. et al. Thermoelectric properties of polycrystalline SrZn2Sb2 prepared
by spark plasma sintering. J. Electron. Mater. 39, 1772 –1776 (2010).
58. Vo čadlo, N. L. & Price, G. D. The Grüneisen parameter —computer calculations via
lattice dynamics. Phys. Earth Planet. Inter. 82, 261–270 (1994).
59. Pedregosa, F et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn Res.
12,
2825–2830 (2011).
60. Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. Regularization paths for generalized linear
models via coordinate descent. J. Stat. Softw. 33,1–22 (2010).
61. Ridgeway, G. gbm: Generalized boosted regression models, version 2.1. The
Comprehensive R Archive Network 1–34 (2017).
62. Kelley, K. Con ﬁdence intervals for standardized effect sizes: theory, application,
and implementation. J. Stat. Softw. 20,1–24 (2007).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the CreativeCommons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third partymaterial in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in thearticle ’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2018A strategy to apply machine learning to small materials
Y Zhang and C Ling
8
npj Computational Materials (2018)  25 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences